---
layout: default
title: CyberTracker Classic
has_children: true
nav_order: 3
permalink: /classic/
---
# CyberTracker Classic

## What is CyberTracker Classic?

[CyberTracker](http://cybertracker.org) is a non-profit organization
which created a software application as part of a larger vision.
CyberTracker is also a software application for mobile data capture and
visualization.

It is used widely in conservation, because of it's [award
winning](http://cybertracker.org/background/awards) Icon User Interface,
but has also been successfully customized for a variety of other fields.

From its origins with indigenous Kalahari trackers, CyberTracker
projects have been initiated to protect rhinos in Africa, to monitor
gorillas in the Congo, snow leopards in the Himalayas, butterflies in
Switzerland, jaguars in Costa Rica, birds in the Amazon, wild horses in
Mongolia, dolphins in California, marine turtles in the Pacific and
whales in Antarctica.

CyberTracker is being used worldwide by indigenous communities, in
national parks, scientific research, citizen science, environmental
education, forestry, farming, social surveys, crime prevention and
disaster relief.

Climate change, pollution, habitat destruction and loss of biodiversity
may have serious impacts on human welfare. To prevent this will require
ongoing long-term monitoring of all aspects of the environment. Our
vision is to promote the development of a Worldwide Environmental
Monitoring Network.

## What does CyberTracker need in order to run?

The desktop application runs on all versions of Microsoft Windows.

Data can be captured directly using the desktop software or an
[Android](http://www.bing.com/images/search?q=android+phone) or [Windows
Mobile](http://www.bing.com/images/search?q=rugged+windows+mobile)
device. iOS is supported as well, but there are some limitations.

## How much does CyberTracker cost?

CyberTracker is freeware and is supported through donors and community
funded features.

## How can I get technical support?

CyberTracker is supported by a [Google
group](https://groups.google.com/g/cybertrackerwiki/). The group is
monitored by the CyberTracker team and has many knowledgeable folks
asking and answering questions.

The group has been around for many years, so try searching the archives
to get a sense for the kinds of questions people ask.
