## Introduction: the SMART Approach for Law Enforcement Monitoring (LEM)

### Overview

The SMART Approach for law enforcement monitoring involves a five-step
process starting with the collection of field data by ranger patrols,
through to decision-making and strategic planning (Fig. 1).

- **Ranger patrols** - Patrol teams collect and record data on where they go and what they see, such as human activities (e.g., signs of poaching, habitat encroachment, timber cutting), interventions (e.g., arrests, issuing of fines, confiscations of weapons and other restricted or banned equipment) and/or observations of wildlife and habitat features.

- **Data input** - Patrol teams report their patrol activities through a debrief, and patrol data and routes are checked for quality and/or errors and are then stored in the SMART patrol database.

- **Mapping and reporting** - Data are processed into highly visual tables, charts, and maps showing patrol effort, coverage and results, forming the basis for patrol analysis and evaluation.

- **Feedback and evaluation** - Regular meetings with rangers are held to discuss patrol effort, effectiveness and results to ensure all stakeholders are kept informed and to demonstrate the value of ranger efforts.

- **Strategic planning** - Managers, rangers, and other stakeholders plan adaptive patrol strategies based on analysis of previous results and set new patrol targets. These plans are communicated to the field staff and the cycle begins again.

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/smart/image128.png)
**Fig. 1. The SMART Approach for adaptive management of conservation areas**

### What data to collect? Why?

Data collected by field teams should have inherent value for the
management of the conservation area. Valuable data will include
observations of wildlife, human activities (both legal and illegal), the
condition of natural features, such as feeding, breeding and roosting
areas, and movements and activities of patrol teams. Data must be
recorded accurately and honestly so that decisions made on the basis of
the observations are the most informed decisions possible.

### What is the benefit of having geo-referenced data?

In order for managers to understand the distribution of threats and
wildlife inside the conservation area, and where needed, direct field
teams to take appropriate follow-up action, observations collected by
patrol teams need to be geo-referenced. This means that each observation
has a location and time attached to it that makes it possible to plot
the observation onto digital maps of the conservation area. The quickest
and most accurate way to do this is by using a dedicated Global
Positioning System (GPS) device or a handheld device with GPS function.
As such, the GPS is an important tool for information or
intelligence-led patrolling.

### Importance of data management

Increasing threats to wildlife and habitats puts increasing pressure on
managers to respond with the right decisions in a time efficient manner.
Ranger teams need to be deployed to threat hotspots so they can arrest
poachers, detect snares and traps and prevent wildlife crime from
happening thus, saving the lives of animals. To ensure this happens,
accurate and honest data should be recorded by rangers in the field, and
this data needs to be turned into information in as close to real-time
as possible. Patrol data may not be the only kind of data used to make
decisions (see below).

### Data quality and why it is important

Rangers and other field staff play a primary role in ensuring good
quality data are collected in the field (Fig. 2). Only good quality data
can be included in basic analyses (queries and summaries) and reports to
management. Rangers may need to verify the locations and times of
observations of human activities recorded by patrols, and confirm any
unusual observations, such as records of endangered species, or details
of enforcement interventions, infractions recorded and actions taken.
Poor quality data should be addressed by conducting training or
refresher training as needed, to upgrade skills and by using various
approaches to motivate rangers to achieve a higher level of performance.
![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/smart/image160.png)
**Fig. 2. Decisions made using data will only be as good as the data
that has been collected.**

### Information needs for the implementing agency

At the time of writing, nearly 1,000 sites in more than 65 countries are
involved in SMART deployments. This includes 16 countries which have
adopted SMART as a national monitoring system for their protected areas.
More than 115 government agencies are currently involved in these
deployments. Each agency has its own needs for information that can help
with effective park protection and management, monitoring of endangered
species and threats. For example, managers of national parks and marine
protected areas require information on human impact in order to
implement plans for managing recreation areas and other managed use
zones. Wildlife sanctuaries and game reserves are set up to protect
focal species, so managers require information on the distribution of
those species and the spatial and temporal distribution of threats to
wildlife and their habitats. Community conservancies are established to
manage human use of lands, so managers need to assess impacts on natural
resources that may be used by local people.

### Why SMART? Reasons for choosing SMART over other LEM monitoring tools

SMART is the world's leading tool for conservation law enforcement
monitoring (LEM) and protected area management[^1]. SMART LEM enables
the collection, storage, communication, and evaluation of data on patrol
efforts, patrol results, and threat levels, along with feedback from
decision-makers to the frontline. Data collection is possible through
the use of paper forms plus GPS, or via handheld digital devices.
Available in multiple languages, data analysis is facilitated by an
easy-to-use query wizard (see: [SMART Essentials Training
Handbook](https://smartconservationtools.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/SMART%20Essentials%20Training%20Handbook_v1.0.pdf),
page 59). Implementation of SMART LEM can enhance law enforcement
effectiveness, improve morale of protection teams, and reduce threats to
wildlife and other natural resources at numerous sites across the
world[^1]. When effectively employed, to create and sustain
information flow between rangers and conservation managers as part of
the SMART Approach, SMART LEM can be used to substantially improve
protection of wildlife and their habitats.

![]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/smart/image130.jpg)
**Ranger Enkchimeg in the Mongolian Gobi desert**

### SMART Competences

The ability to use the SMART tools for collecting and managing field
patrol or survey data falls under two competence categories;
Development, Deployment and Management of SMART (DDM), and Field Data
Collection (FDC). These competences would be needed by middle
managers/technical experts and skilled workers. In this manual specific
SMART competences[^2] relevant to the tasks described are indicated for
each subheading. These include

DDM 2.6 Set up field devices for collecting SMART data

DDM 2.7 Integrating new technologies for data collection into the SMART
system

DDM 2.8 Collate and manage data collected in the field

DDM 3.1 Direct installation and setup of hardware and software required
for SMART

DDM 3.2 Direct set up and customization of SMART according to specified
requirements

DDM 3.3 Direct development of standard data collection protocols
compliant with SMART

FDC 1.1 Correctly identify and classify observations required for entry
into the SMART system

FDC 1.2 Correctly enter data/information into devices configured for
SMART data collection

FDC 1.6 Ensure that data collected in the field is correctly submitted

FDC 2.1 Plan and lead practical field data collection using SMART

FDC 2.3 Lead data collection in the field
